We live in a world full of events that cause suffering to millions of people.
We're not completely surprised because we are living in the last days.
But suffering can and has turned many away from God.
They blame Him. They're angry at Him.
So how do our brothers and sisters cope?
The Apostle Paul was familiar with suffering.
When he wrote his second letter to Timothy, Paul was in prison.
What did he say about the subject?
Second Timothy 1 verse 8, Paul says,
Take your part in suffering adversity for the good news by relying on the power of God.
The context shows that we suffer because of our Christian faith,
but it stands true that God's power can help us through any adversity.
That's why today we want to interview Gilead students from two countries
that have experienced adversity.
Venezuela and Rwanda.
And see through the interviews how God's power helped them to endure
and to thrive spiritually.
First, please welcome Gilead and Elis Muitinesa from the beautiful country of Rwanda.
Welcome Gilead and Elis.
It's nice to spend some time with you both.
Thank you.
Now, understand that you were born and raised in Rwanda
and now you serve at the branch.
Tell us a little bit about your country.
Rwanda is called the land of a thousand years.
Within one country, you will see rainforests,
volcanoes, mountains, and nice valleys.
We have an amazing Wari Dreyftoon.
That is amazing.
And what about the people?
People are very warm, respectful and hospitable.
In fact, it's very easy to start a Bible conversation with people you meet.
Oh, enjoyable.
In this picture, what's happening with you and the children?
In this village, it was the first time these children were watching the video
of Caliban Sophia and they were very happy.
That's precious.
When we hear Rwanda, many of us can't help,
but think back to that terrible time,
the genocide against the Tutsi.
Can you explain what happened?
It was frightening.
It was reported that as many as a million people were killed
including 400 of our brothers and sisters.
And this happened in a short span of just a hundred days.
I can't imagine anybody going through such horror.
And that was 1994, which means this year marks exactly 30 years since that event.
How old were you then?
We were teenagers, 15 years, 16 years.
To go through that as a youth, as a teenager,
how terrifying.
What helped you to cope?
For me, my parents were Jehovah's Witnesses
and they set a very good example for us.
I was one of 10 children, but my parents took in my young cousin.
But they also opened their home for more children.
They took 11 more.
And in the family, in total, we were 25.
Why did your parents take in the other children?
Unfortunately, they were all found by the genocide.
25 children.
That's a lot of miles to feed.
Yes, I remember one time my mom made chicken
and she cut the chicken into 25 different pieces
and put them on a platter.
Then she told all children to close their eyes
and pick a piece of chicken.
So wherever you pick, you pick.
And where did you all sleep at night?
Every evening, we would lay mattresses in no rooms
so that the kids could get where to sleep.
Thank you for describing that life to us.
Was it hard for you?
No, it was not hard because of two reasons.
First of all, the whole country was in the same situation.
Second, my parents will get some financial help
and the elders in the congregation told them
that this was from the worldwide brotherhood
of Jehovah's Witnesses.
And to see this as a young person,
it really touched me, Brother Clark.
I was wondering how brothers and sisters
who I never met before were helping me.
I was really touched.
That is the power of God,
working through our loving worldwide brotherhood.
Beautiful.
What was your experience, did you, darling?
I was also shown so much love this time.
For me, my parents were not in the truth
and I was just an unbakedized publisher.
Still, the elders came to me
and provided me with material assistance
for food and clothing.
In fact, I got my first suit jacket
for the meeting from them.
I remember thinking,
why me?
I'm not yet even baptized.
But they remembered me.
Seeing Jehovah's love
like this affected me deeply.
That's encouraging.
Now, here's a picture of you on the left,
in a suit jacket.
How old are you there?
They are.
I am around 18.
And who's that with you?
That's my cousin.
And my Bible teacher.
Your cousin taught you the Bible?
Yes.
How's he doing today?
He's doing very well.
In fact, he's here with us during our graduation.
Today?
Yes.
Welcome, cousin.
What a moment for you and a moment for you, too.
And how's your family doing, Elise?
I'm happy to say that all my siblings
and my wee-dod mom served Jehovah.
Beautiful.
Now, how many sisters do you have?
Four sisters and their families.
And how many brothers?
Five.
Five brothers and their families.
And they're all doing well spiritually.
What a blessing.
If we could go back to the events of 1994,
when the genocide stopped,
what happened to our brothers and sisters?
Something amazing happened.
You see,
years before the genocide,
there were some brothers living outside the country as refugees.
During the genocide,
more brothers fled the country.
So after the genocide,
the Erdas helped those brothers
to find their way back home.
Then after, they started shepherding everyone
to promote unity.
How good.
But if they're all Rwandan brothers and sisters,
then why were the elders focusing on unity?
They were strong feelings for those who fled the country
and those who stayed.
But the Erdas used Bible accounts
and the Bible principles
to help them see
that freeing was a personal decision.
And this helped the brothers
to unite Mokitri.
I see.
Again, the power of God working through the elder arrangement
to unify them.
And were the results of all that shepherding?
Yes.
You see, the genocide was stopped in the dry 1994.
A few months later,
in December, we tried off our first assembly.
3,000 people came from all the corners of the country.
The local authorities saying this, they stopped us.
They were saying it was not safe yet.
But I remember that before leaving the assembly grounds,
we were hugging and hugging
and we could see love and unity
among our brothers and sisters.
We never forget that.
That is beautiful.
Did the genocide cause our brothers and sisters
to slow down in their ministry?
Slow down?
No way, my brother.
When you see Jehovah's love like this,
you feel like a Jeremiah.
You cannot hold it in.
Yeah, it's true.
It's not easy to explain,
but the more Satan tries to make you fear,
the more courage Jehovah gives you.
And it's like fire inside
you want to preach the good news to others.
That's good to hear.
And what's the result of that fire and zeal?
In 1994, we were 2,500 publishers in Rwanda.
But now we are over 33,000 publishers.
And looking at the latest report,
we've had a worldwide increase of almost 2%,
which is great.
But in that same time, five years,
Rwanda has had over 8% increase.
The publishers in Rwanda are thriving.
In fact, Rwanda is not occurred
only the land of thousands here.
It is also called the land of thousands of miles.
Like your smiles right now.
Thank you so much, brother and sister Muaytenezah,
for encouraging us, strengthening us.
We pray that Jehovah continue to bless you
and the brothers and sisters in Rwanda.
Thank you.
Next, let's interview Ronald Rodriguez
from the beautiful country of Venezuela.
Ronald, it's nice to have you here.
Thank you.
Tell us a little bit about your life.
I was raised in the truth by good parents.
I go baptized out of a young age.
I have a picture of that.
Would you like to say it?
I would.
That's me in Caracas, the capital city of Venezuela.
It was exactly the day I go baptized.
As you can see, I was very little.
I was just 10 years old.
Very nice, Ronald.
May I ask what motivated you to get baptized at that age?
It was definitely my parents' example.
I watched how they kept their loyalty and integrity to Jehovah
despite facing difficult challenges.
So that example really impressed me.
Very nice.
And this is your parents now?
They are my parents.
Gracias, mama, a papa.
They did a good job raising their children.
And now you work at the branch?
How long have you been there?
For about six years.
And currently I work in the PID.
A public information department.
And what do you do in that department?
In that department, we assist with providing information about our activities
to government officials, to the media, and also to those in the academic field.
Well, thank you for your hard work.
Now, this picture is you at Bethel with some members of the family?
Yes, that's at my office.
You see there is one of my fellow Bethelites in Venezuela.
And that picture has a special meaning for me.
Do you see the sister on the left at the front?
She was Janice Bladwood.
She was one of the first missionaries that came to Venezuela from Gilead.
One of the first?
Yes.
It was in the 50s.
Wow.
And she would come to our office every Thursday for a coffee break.
And she was full of stories.
So she would tell us beautiful experience they had when she came to Venezuela with other sisters.
And so every time that we had a question about our theocratic history,
she was there to answer the question.
What a rich heritage you have.
Yeah, we really loved her visits.
Unfortunately, she passed away recently last November.
You're going to miss her?
Yeah, definitely.
Because we treasure good memories with her.
By the way, Ronald's not only smiling in pictures, he's always smiling.
In fact, you think that he was from Rwanda, the land of a thousand smiles.
But seriously, it has not always been smiles for you.
You've had some challenges.
Would you like to explain?
Sure.
I always wanted to attend a theocratic school.
In 2018, I was invited to SKE.
But at the same time, I received an excellent paint-up offer.
It was super good.
But I turned it down because I didn't want anything to prevent me from going to SKE.
The thing was that five days before the start of the classes, the school was canceled.
Cancelled?
Yes.
How did you feel?
Well, honestly, it was hard time for me.
I felt depressed.
I didn't know what to do.
Yeah, you had no school and no job offer anymore.
So what did you do?
I was just doing some little jobs, whatever I could find.
That would be stressful.
Why did they cancel the school?
It was because of the economic situation in the country.
I would say that between the years 2017 to 2019, those years were particularly difficult for us in Venezuela.
Due to hyperinflation, foot shortages were very common.
Well, we understand inflation, but can you explain how hyperinflation would affect you personally?
Because the prices for basic things like food, medicines, or clothing, those prices could increase dramatically.
For example, what I could afford in the morning, I could not afford by the end of the day.
And the following day, the price would increase again.
That's unbearable.
Yeah, and during that time for me, especially 2017, 2018, I was pioneering and struggling to make ends meet.
But I got to see how Jehovah was there for me personally.
One of the most special things I remember, it was one moment that I didn't have a money to eat enough food for two days.
So I was worried and emotionally I was not feeling well.
But I remember that I set a prayer to Jehovah just in that moment.
And it was amazing.
Just within minutes of that prayer, I received a call from a sister.
And she was asking me a really surprising question.
What is your bank account number?
She wanted to send you funds.
Yes.
And she told me that it was from our brothers and sisters from all the countries.
They sent some of money to be divided between five people.
And I was selected to be the fifth person.
We were the fifth.
Yes.
It was very special for me.
It provided for my meals for a whole week.
And the answer to that prayer is something that I cannot forget.
No, just moments after praying and you get an answer, that's the power of God affecting you in a very personal way.
Well, that is really encouraging.
What else helped you through that period of anxiety?
I love nature.
And like Rwanda Venezuela has many beautiful landscapes all in one country.
We have spectacular beaches.
We have deserts, jungles, mountains.
And I know that many people have probably heard about the famous Angel Falls.
And for me, I found a place that I could really enjoy.
There in Caracas, the capital, we have a mountain.
It is called El Avila.
That was a very special place for me.
I would hike up that mountain very often.
Because I found that being out there into help us, beautiful creation,
it helped me to get closer to Jehovah.
And when I was there talking to Jehovah, all my insight is that it just went away.
And I was calm and refreshed.
I'm glad you found a spot you could go where it was just you and Jehovah alone.
We all need that.
Very good.
Meanwhile, how are the brothers and sisters coping through this anxiety?
That's incredible to me.
I would see the brothers and sisters openly sharing the little they had with one another.
And sometimes it was very little.
But they were just sharing that.
Very nice.
What is she holding?
That's a vegetable.
We call that auyama in Venezuela.
But honestly, I never remembered the name in English.
It looks like a squash.
I think it's that.
It was a disaster relief program that the branches started to encourage the brothers and sisters to start growing food.
So if you have a farm, grow food and share with...
No, not necessarily.
You could participate with or without experience.
Anybody.
Anybody, yeah?
And if you did have experience, you were given some training.
Not just in lands, but also in balconies, in gardens.
So basically everywhere.
So get some dirt and start planting.
Yes.
How did they respond to that encouragement?
It was contagious.
You would see the brothers enjoying that activity.
They were so happy doing that.
That's beautiful.
There's again God's power working through His organization.
And the brothers and sisters are responding.
Yes.
That's wonderful.
Especially for brothers and sisters who had no jobs or lost their jobs.
Yeah, that point is very interesting because many of the brothers or sisters were in that situation without jobs.
But they didn't give into despair.
They decided to pioneer.
That example really touches my heart.
So they're going through adversity, but they're thinking, what more can I do for Jehovah?
That is so encouraging.
Yes.
Ronald, did you ever get to SK?
I did, but I guess what?
What happened?
I received an excellent paying job offer at the same time again.
Again.
And this time you thought maybe I should hang on to the job in case they cancel the school?
Absolutely not.
Because that amazing job offer came at the same time that everyone in the country was struggling to get a decent job.
And I had this new invitation for going to this school.
So I knew who was behind the temptation.
And I knew it was not Jehovah, of course.
So I didn't accept that job offer.
I went to SK and it was wonderful.
Well done.
And after graduation, what was your assignment?
Well, I received an assignment, but three days after the graduation, that was changed.
And that time I was invited to go to Bethel.
I was really not expecting that.
Especially because I was asked to work in departments that I didn't have any experience in.
Like PID.
Yes.
And my first assignment was in hospital information department, no experience.
So for both assignments, I felt very unqualified, asking myself how am I going to do this?
But then I realized something.
Does I have seen Jehovah's steady hand before in my life?
I would experience that again for this new chapter, and I have.
I like that expression. Jehovah's steady hand, three times of anxiety.
Now, for our brothers and sisters, currently, is it any better?
In some ways, things have improved.
But honestly, we will need to hope to permanently fix the situation.
However, spiritually, our brothers are thriving in Venezuela.
Really?
Yes.
Because we have so many pioneers, so many publishers.
It's so common and so encouraging that you go to a congregation.
And you see that 30 or 40% of the publishers are serving as regular pioneers.
And I can tell you that personally, what really impresses me is that it's not just the older ones,
but also the young ones, our pioneer.
In Venezuela, now we have hundreds of pioneers under the age of 15, for example.
So, older ones and younger ones relying on the power of God to get through this adversity
as they remain zealous for the ministry.
That is so encouraging.
Yes, that's why I love my brothers and sisters in Venezuela.
They keep enduring.
And we have wonderful association, good time together.
I'm so sure that's because we have been through so much together.
I agree.
You have a shared experience where you've bonded together through adversity
and you're thriving spiritually and staying close together.
Ronald, this has been so encouraging.
Thank you very much for strengthening our faith.
And we pray that Jehovah continue to bless you and the brothers and sisters in Venezuela as well.
Thank you.
Now, let's interview Dimitri and Elsa Litzios from Greece.
Welcome, Dimitri and Elsa.
Happy to have you here.
Thank you.
The last inside story, we got a tour of some of the Bible lands in what is now Turkey.
So, we thought, because you're from Greece, could we see some of the Bible lands from your country too?
Of course.
We have many places in Greece that are mentioned in the Bible.
And when you see these ancient sites, they really help make Bible come alive.
That's right.
That's why we have prepared a video that we can show to everyone.
Can we see it now?
Yes.
Of course.
Please enjoy.
Paul spent much of his second and third missionary tours in Greece and Macedonia.
That's right.
Let's take a walk back in time alongside the Apostle Paul.
Paul began his second missionary tour in Apolis, which is the modern day city of Cavala.
He came here by boat from Troas.
Do you remember what brought Paul here?
He received a vision in which a Macedonian man entrusted him.
Step over into Macedonia and help us.
And so Paul answered the call and came here.
That's right.
From here, Paul traveled to Philippine.
This took him about three or four hours as he crossed the mountain range between the two cities.
Located in the eastern region of Macedonia, this city was privileged to be the first in Europe
to hear Paul preach the good news around 50 CE.
And things went really well at first.
It was here that Lydia and her entire family became believers.
But soon, Paul faced adversity when he was thrown into prison, along with his friend Silas.
Interestingly, you can still see ruins of an ancient prison in Philippine.
While we cannot say for sure, it is possible that Paul and Silas stayed here overnight.
But by the power of God, they were miraculously released.
Also in Philippine, you can walk along the famous road called the Via Ignatia.
This was the first major Roman highway built outside of Rome, linking Europe with Asia.
Next, Paul and Silas arrived in Thessalonica, the city where I was born.
Paul's first two letters were addressed to the congregation here.
Not long after that, Paul and Silas arrived in Berea, and they had a very good experience here.
Yes, the Bible tells us that the Bereans accepted the world with the greatest ignorance of mind,
carefully examining the scriptures daily to see whether these things were true.
And as a result, many became believers.
Today, ancient Berea is known as Berea.
You can visit a synagogue that was built around 1850 CE on top of the ruins of an ancient synagogue.
Perhaps Paul preached right here.
One day, we'll find out.
After Berea, Paul had his south towards Athens.
By Paul's time, this city was known primarily as the center of Greek learning, literature and art.
It was home to famous philosophers such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotel.
It was also a very religious city.
I was found in temples, public squares and on the streets.
People regularly prayed to the gods before engaging in many activities.
Yes, and it was here at the Ereopagus, or Mars Hill, as it is sometimes called,
that Paul gave an eloquent witness about the unknown god.
In fact, today, you can see a bronze plaque on Mars Hill that includes these speeds of the Apostle Paul.
And finally, we come to Corinth, to the far south.
This city was a busy crossroads for commerce and trading.
You can see ruins of the judgment seat known as the Bima, temples and many other things here.
In fact, during class, we used our study Bible media to see and learn more about Corinth.
There is a lot there if you like history.
Well, we hope you enjoyed traveling with us in some of the Apostle Paul's footsteps.
Today, our brothers and sisters in Greece are working very hard in imitation of the Apostle Paul.
And they joyfully sent you Mars love.
That was fantastic.
Thank you so much for showing that.
Our pleasure.
And it's nice to see modern-day Paul's and Silas' and Lidias, Zealous and the Preaching Work.
Please send our love back to the brothers and sisters in Greece for us.
Thank you.
Did you enjoy that video?
And what did you think of the two interviews?
What helped our brothers and sisters to cope through that adversity?
Remember, 2 Timothy 1 verse 8, it was by the power of God.
Are you suffering through adversity right now?
Know that Jehovah sees you and that his mighty arm will help you to endure with patience and with joy.
Our brothers and sisters in Venezuela and Rwanda are an encouraging example to us.
They saw the power of God help them, and in many ways it was through the organization and the loving brotherhood.
Stay close with Jehovah's organization, remain united with the brotherhood,
and we will endure any adversity that comes our way until our reward comes.
We look forward to seeing you again on the next episode of The Inside Story.